# Day 3

Today, I wrote code to read in resources as defined by a KDL file.  A KDL file is
a textual format of a type similar to YAML, XML, JSON, TOML etc.  Details of the
file format can be found at [https://kdl.dev/](https://kdl.dev/).

The resource file is called `core.kdl` and provides details of:

- The texture atlases that are used to provide textures to the blocks.
- The names of the tiles within the texture atlas.
- The block types that are in the game, including:
    - Its name.
    - Which tiles cover the six sides.

## The file format of the KDL file

A KDL file format consists of nodes that can contain other nodes.  Each node
starts with a name followed by arguments (that are required) and attributes
(that are optional).

A leaf node looks like this:

```
<node-name> (<args>)* (<attribute-name>=<attribute value>)*
```

Additionally, a node can end with braces that contains other nodes.  Typically,
a node is on its own line.  But you can have several nodes on the same line if
they are separated with semi-colons.

The KDL supports 4 types:

- Strings
- Numbers (floating point or integers)
- Booleans
- Null

The are further details about the KDL format that you can read about in its
website.

To read the file, I use a crate called `knuffel` that can map a format to Rust
enums and structs in a similar to way that `serde` does.  This allows really
easy parsing of a file format of my choosing.

In the `core.kdl` file it currently consists of 3 top level nodes:

- Textures.
- Tiles.
- Blocks.

So the general format can be:

```kdl
textures {
    ...
}

tiles {
    ...
}

blocks {
    ...
}
```

This maps to the `KdlTopLevel` enum so parsing the file ultimately returns me a
`Vec<KdlTopLevel>` value.

This is defined as:

```rust
#[derive(Debug, Decode)]
enum KdlTopLevel {
    Textures(KdlTextures),
    Tiles(KdlTiles),
    Blocks(KdlBlocks),
}
```

The `Decode` trait is implemented by the derive statement.  This allows
`knuffel` to automatically parse the nodes and create those enums.  Note the
enum field names converted to lower-case match the node names in the file
format.  This is fine for me.  If I wanted different, I could have added an
attribute to set the node name that maps to the specific field.

Let's go over the sections.

### Textures

The textures section lists all the texture atlases.  It takes the form:

```kdl
textures {
    texture "<name>" "<relative-path>" <num-tiles-width> <num-tiles-height>
}
```

This will map to the `KdlTextures` struct that just contains a `Vec<KdlTexture>`
because we can have several texture declarations in a section.  It looks like:

```rust
#[derive(Decode, Debug)]
pub struct KdlTextures {
    #[knuffel(children(name = "texture"))]
    textures: Vec<KdlTexture>,
}
```

The `children` declaration makes sure that any node names `texture` within is
inserted into the `textures` vector.

The `KdlTexture` struct looks like:

```rust
#[derive(Decode, Debug)]
pub struct KdlTexture {
    #[knuffel(argument)]
    name: String,
    #[knuffel(argument)]
    path: PathBuf,
    #[knuffel(argument)]
    tile_width: usize,
    #[knuffel(argument)]
    tile_height: usize,
}
```

This struct clearly defines the argument types and `knuffel` will quite happily
map the `texture` node arguments to those fields.  Here, because arguments do
not have names, the order matters.

### Tiles

The next section `tiles` lists all the tiles in the texture atlases and gives
them names.  This allows them to be referenced in the `blocks` section.

The section takes this format:

```kdl
tiles {
    tile "<name>" "<texture-name>" <x-coord> <y-coord>
}
```

The X and Y coords refer to the tile in tile coordinates.  For example, the
top-left tile in a texture is at (0, 0), the next tile along is (1, 0) and so
on.

These are the data structures that help parse the KDL:

```rust
#[derive(Decode, Debug)]
pub struct KdlTiles {
    #[knuffel(children(name = "tile"))]
    tiles: Vec<KdlTile>,
}

#[derive(Decode, Debug)]
pub struct KdlTile {
    #[knuffel(argument)]
    name: String,
    #[knuffel(argument)]
    texture_name: String,
    #[knuffel(argument)]
    x: usize,
    #[knuffel(argument)]
    y: usize,
}
```

It's very similar to the texture structs.

### Blocks

Finally, we have the blocks sections.  The node uses attributes to refer to the
tiles used.  Typically, we have 3 forms:

```kdl
blocks {
    block "<name>" tiles="<tile-name>"
    block "<name>" sides="<tile-name>" top="<tile-name>" bottom="<tile-name>"
    block "<name>" top="<name>" bottom="<name>" 
                   left="<name>" right="<name>" 
                   front="<name>" back="<name>"
    ...
}
```

The attributes can be mixed but the parser gives certain priorities with
interpreting the attributes:

- Firstly, `tiles` is read and all 6 tiles of a block are set to this.
- Secondly, `sides` is read and the front, back, left and right tiles of a block are set.
- Thirdly, the other attributes are individually processed and the associated
  block side is set.

This means you could use `tiles` and `top` if you wanted the block to have the
same tile for each side except for the top.

The structs involved are:

```rust
#[derive(Decode, Debug)]
pub struct KdlBlocks {
    #[knuffel(children(name = "block"))]
    blocks: Vec<KdlBlock>,
}

#[derive(Decode, Debug)]
pub struct KdlBlock {
    #[knuffel(argument)]
    name: String,
    #[knuffel(argument)]
    tiles: Option<String>,
    #[knuffel(argument)]
    sides: Option<String>,
    #[knuffel(argument)]
    top: Option<String>,
    #[knuffel(argument)]
    bottom: Option<String>,
    #[knuffel(argument)]
    front: Option<String>,
    #[knuffel(argument)]
    back: Option<String>,
    #[knuffel(argument)]
    left: Option<String>,
    #[knuffel(argument)]
    right: Option<String>,
}
```

## The database

We have a struct called `Database` that stores all the information obtained from
all KDL files we process.  After generating a `Vec<KdlTopLevel>` that contains
all the parsed information from a KDL file, we merge it into our database and
throw it away.

The database holds vectors to store the texture atlases (via `image` crate), the
tile information and the block information.  Beside these vectors, we have
hashmaps to map their names to the indices.  So, for example, if we want to look
up the block names `foo`, we can look up the hashmap `Database::block_names` to
find the index, and then look up `Database::blocks[index]` to find the instance
of `Block` that we want.

The game will use the instance of the `Database` struct to store all game
information and keep it in memory at all times.  It becomes a read-only data
structure after this.